rfc: Constellation state file (#2281)
edgelesssys/constellation: rfc/state-file.md

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to write down the design goals for the file in a separate section `# Design goals`.
This would make it easier to assess the rest of the RFC.

From what I am seeing so far that would be: 
- have a single source of truth the Constellation CLI relies on to read/store information for lifecycle management.
- remove the dependency on a tfstate file during runtime. Whatever infra management tool is used to create the infra - the Constellation CLI consumes the infra state from the statefile.

Author: I feel like this is already taken care of by the `# Proposal` section, no?

        IPCidrNode: "192.0.2.0/24"
        IPCidrPod: "192.0.2.0/24"
runtimeResources:
    clusterID: "00112233445566778899AABBCCDDEEFF"
    ownerID: "00112233445566778899AABBCCDDEEFF"
    measurementSalt: "c2VjcmV0Cg=="
```

## Updates to the state file

Values depending on Terraform, that change during a Constellation upgrade, should be automatically updated by the CLI if the cloud resources are not manually managed by the user.
If they are manually managed, the user has to update the values on their own.

Values depending purely on Kubernetes/node state should be automatically updated by the CLI.

Breaking format changes should be automatically handled for `runtimeResources`.
Breaking format changes should be automatically handled for `cloudResources` if the resources are managed by the Constellation CLI.
Otherwise, we should provide documentation and/or tooling for migrating old file formats.

## Migrating from terraform outputs + id file

The Constellation version implementing the state file should provide an upgrade path for moving the Terraform outputs and cluster id file content into the new state file.
This should happen at the beginning of `constellation upgrade apply`.

> We might want to implement a CLI command to automatically create the state file from and existing Terraform state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We might want to implement a CLI command to automatically create the state file from an existing Terraform state.
```

This will allow us to more easily decouple resource creation/management from Constellation.
Meaning it should be much easier for Constellation users to have different parties create and update cloud resources and IAM using their own tooling (e.g. Terraform),
and only use the Constellation CLI for Kubernetes cluster management (Kubernetes versions, service versions, image upgrades etc.).

## Format

The state file will be in annotated YAML format, and contain a version number to keep track of necessary migrations or breaking formats.
The file should be split into multiple sections for each relevant resource.
Annotations should be provided for all keys in the file.
Where possible, links to documentation for specific keys should be provided to further explain their usage.

Each section and key should have a comment dedicated to explaining what it does, where to get it from, and if it is to be considered read-only,
or if a user has to supplement a value themselves (if they manage their own infrastructure).

Information that is only used to upgrade Terraform resources (e.g. IAM) should not be part of this file.

The following is a list of proposed sections:

> * Cloud resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Infrastructure
```

    Information about resources we currently create using Terraform.
    Essentially, we want to record the information we currently write to the cluster ID file during `create`,
    as well as the Terraform output during `create`.

    This field is expected to be manually set if cloud resources were manually deployed by a user.
    If cloud resource were created with the Constellation CLI (using `constellation create`),
    it will be populated automatically.

> * Runtime resources
> 
>     Cluster ID, measurement salt etc.
>     This field will be automatically populated during `constellation init`.
>     This entry should be marked with `DO NOT EDIT` to make it clear these resources are expected to not be touched by a user manually.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Cluster values

    Cluster ID, measurement salt etc.
    This field will be automatically populated during `constellation init`.
    This entry should be marked with `DO NOT EDIT` to make it clear these values are expected to not be touched by a user manually.
```

    # gcp contains resources specific for GCP.
    gcp:
        projectID: "project-id" # project ID the cluster is deployed to.
        ipCidrNode: "192.0.2.0/24" # IP Cidr range of the cluster's nodes.
        ipCidrPod: "192.0.2.0/24" # IP Cidr range of the cluster's pods.
# clusterValues contains values generated by Constellation when bootstrapping the cluster.
# These values are automatically generated and filled in by Constellation.
# DO NOT TOUCH
clusterValues:
    clusterID: "00112233445566778899AABBCCDDEEFF" # cluster ID uniquely identifies this Constellation cluster.
    ownerID: "00112233445566778899AABBCCDDEEFF" # owner ID identifies this cluster as belonging to owner.
    measurementSalt: "c2VjcmV0Cg==" # measurement salt is used by nodes to derive their cluster ID.
```

## Updates to the state file

Values depending on Terraform, that change during a Constellation upgrade, should be automatically updated by the CLI if the cloud resources are not manually managed by the user.
If they are manually managed, the user has to update the values on their own.

Values depending purely on Kubernetes/node state should be automatically updated by the CLI.

> Breaking format changes should be automatically handled for `runtimeResources`.
> Breaking format changes should be automatically handled for `cloudResources` if the resources are managed by the Constellation CLI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Breaking format changes should be automatically handled for `clusterValues`.
Breaking format changes should be automatically handled for `infrastructure` if the resources are managed by the Constellation CLI.
```

# Constellation state file

During a cluster's lifecycle, Constellation needs to keep track of multiple different values and state information of the cluster,
like loadbalancer IPs or UID of the cluster.

If this information is configurable by a user, and required to set up the cluster, the user saves it in Constellation's config file.
Information that is not configurable, and that is generated by the cluster during the creation or init phase is either saved in Terraform output files,
or in the cluster ID file (`constellation-id.json`).

This creates problems since the relevant information may be split over multiple files, and it is not always clear at what point certain information is available in the cluster ID file.
Additionally, commands like `upgrade` and `init` currently depend on Terraform files being present in the working directory,

> which may not be the case if the cloud resources were manually created.

Reviewer: Agreed that it would be nice if we can remove the need for tf state in the workspace with this file. Ideally we would have a command in the CLI to parse TF state into Constellation state, imo.
Sth like `constellation config parse-state <tfstate-path>`.

> which may not be the case if the cloud resources were manually created.

Author: Agreed, but implementation details and integration of parsing of existing terraform state is out of scope for this rfc

## Proposal

Add a Constellation state file to keep track of this information.
This file should replace the current `constellation-id.json` file and be the single source of truth for this kind of cluster relevant information.
The file should keep track of all information currently kept in `constellation-id.json`, as well as information we currently have to read from Terraform files
during `init` or `upgrade`.

The file should be considered "read-only" by users, if Constellation's cloud resource were created using the Constellation CLI.
If the cloud resources were created manually by a user, they will need to manually fill in some of the state file's fields.

This will allow us to more easily decouple resource creation/management from Constellation.
Meaning it should be much easier for Constellation users to have different parties create and update cloud resources and IAM using their own tooling (e.g. Terraform),
and only use the Constellation CLI for Kubernetes cluster management (Kubernetes versions, service versions, image upgrades etc.).

## Format

> The state file will be in either YAML or JSON format, and contain a version number to keep track of necessary migrations or breaking formats.

Reviewer 4: I advocate for YAML:
- more readable, can add comments, we already use yaml for the config file

The file should be split into multiple sections for each relevant resource.

> Information that is only used to upgrade Terraform resources (e.g. IAM) should not be part of this file.

Reviewer 5: Why is that?

Author: The information we keep track of in the state file should be agnostic to how that information was created.
If we require some information to upgrade Terraform state, it should be kept in the Constellation config file instead.

> The following is a list of proposed sections:

Reviewer: Rename to "Writeable" and "Readonly"? It's a bit clumsy, but should make things obvious. And I feel like the current categories aren't that precisely defined, yet.

Author: Writeable and Readonly are IMO not a good fit, since this would only describe how a user can interact with them, but not what these resources actually are.
The name of these keys should describe accurately what these resources are and ideally also at what point in Constellation's lifecycle they are available.
Part of the problem with the current id file is that we write multiple different values to the same struct, but at different times.
This makes it unclear during which command what information is expected to be available from the id file.
The state file should fix this issue, and I dont think Writeable and Readonly would do that.

* Cloud resources

    Information about resources we currently create using Terraform.
    Essentially, we want to record the information we currently write to the cluster ID file during `create`,
    as well as the Terraform output during `create`.

    This field is expected to be manually set if cloud resources were manually deployed by a user.

>     If cloud resource were created with the Constellation CLI (using `constellation create`),

Author: I feel like adding a `Generated Resources: DO NOT EDIT` to the things a user shouldn't touch manually should be enough.

>     If cloud resource were created with the Constellation CLI (using `constellation create`),

Reviewer 4: can u add this to the rfc?

    it will be populated automatically.

* Runtime resources

    cluster ID, measurement salt etc.
    This field will be automatically populated during `constellation init`

YAML file example:

```yaml
version: "v1"

> cloudResources:

Reviewer 4: one thought: if only `cloudResources` are ever thought to be touched by the user shouldn't we let the user create a minimal file and have a separate file for `runtimeResources`?

Reviewer: I would like to not have multiple files. My understanding is that part of the problem we want to address with the statefile is that we have multiple files.

I agree with the point on safety and feel like we should make it obvious to the user what can be changed and what not.

    uid: "001122"
    publicIP: "192.0.2.1"
    initSecret: c2VjcmV0Cg==
    apiServerCertSANs:
        - "192.0.2.1"
        - "endpoint.example.com"
    azure:
        resourceGroup: "example-group"
        subscriptionID: "subscription-id"
        networkSecurityGroupName: "example-group-name"
        loadBalancerName: "example-loadbalancer-name"
        userAssignedIdentity: "identity"
        attestationURL: "attestation.example.com"
    gcp:
        ProjectID: "project-id"
        IPCidrNode: "192.0.2.0/24"
        IPCidrPod: "192.0.2.0/24"
runtimeResources:
    clusterID: "00112233445566778899AABBCCDDEEFF"
    ownerID: "00112233445566778899AABBCCDDEEFF"
    measurementSalt: "c2VjcmV0Cg=="
```

## Updates to the state file

> Values depending on Terraform, that change during a Constellation upgrade, should be automatically updated by the CLI if the cloud resources are not manually managed by the user.

Reviewer 4: Another reason that file separation seems cleaner to me:
- with manual resources the cloudResources file is entirely managed by the user
- the other file is only managed by the CLI

> Values depending on Terraform, that change during a Constellation upgrade, should be automatically updated by the CLI if the cloud resources are not manually managed by the user.

Author: While the idea sounds nice, I don't think that is easily possible without us potentially accidentally corrupting/destroying resources of the user.
The only way I could see this work was if the user used the Terraform files from our CLI to generated the resources, at which point they might as well have used the CLI directly.

If they are manually managed, the user has to update the values on their own.

Values depending purely on Kubernetes/node state should be automatically updated by the CLI.

Breaking format changes should be automatically handled for `runtimeResources`.
They should be automatically handled for `cloudResources` if the resources are managed by the Constellation CLI,

> otherwise we should provide documentation and/or tooling for migrating old file formats.

Author: That is the goal described here.
The "manual" migration is only for e.g. Terraform created by the user through a third party tool.

## Migrating from terraform outputs + id file

The Constellation version implementing the state file should provide an upgrade path for moving the Terraform outputs and cluster id file content into the new state file.

> This should happen at the beginning of `constellation upgrade apply`.

Reviewer: I feel like we could make this a separate command from the beginning. That would be a step towards user-manager TF. And I feel like we have to implement the functionality anyways. Forces us to design the state migration code as a separated entity.

Author: A couple things about this:
First, we need to handle the id file separately anyways, which probably shouldn't happen in a CLI command dedicated to parsing terraform state.

I'm also not yet 100% sold on the idea of implementing a command to parse Terraform state files for the information needed for the Constellation state file.
While it could be a nice convenience for people who do use Terraform, ideally the state file would allow users to use any method for creating their cloud and IAM resources.
Adding a command specifically for Terraform would be a nice convenience, but IMO this shouldnt need to be a high priority.
